Week 6 Applied Sheet
(Solutions)
Useful advice:The following solutions pertain to the theoretical problems given in the applied classes. You are
strongly advised to attempt the problems thoroughly before looking at these solutions. Simply reading the solu-
tions without thinking about the problems will rob you of the practice required to be able to solve complicated
problems on your own. You will perform poorly on the exam if you simply attempt to memorise solutions to
these problems. Thinking about a problem, even if you do not solve it, will greatly increase your understanding
of the underlying concepts. Solutions are typically not provided for Python implementation questions. In some
cases, pseudocode may be provided where it illustrates a particular useful concept.
Problems
Problem 1.Consider a buggy implementation of Dijkstra’s algorithm in which the distance estimate to a vertex
is only updated the first time the vertex is discovered, and not in any subsequent relaxations. Give a graph on
which this bug will cause the algorithm to not produce the correct answer.
Solution
To break such a bug, we need a vertex whose initial distance estimate is very high, but should be subse-
quently lowered by a better path found later. The following graph will cause this problem.
sa
bc d
11000
211
The distance estimate tocwill get locked at 1001, even though it should be updated to 3, and hence the
distances tocanddwill be wrong.
Problem 2.Can Prim’s and Kruskal’s algorithms be applied on a graph with negative weights to compute a
minimum spanning tree? Why or why not?
Solution
Yes, these algorithms can be used to compute a minimum spanning tree on a graph with negative weights.
These algorithm greedily select edges with the smallest weights and are not affected by whether the
weights are positive or negative. This is different from Dijkstra’s algorithm which accumulates the edge
weights to obtain a distance where a negative weight may result in the total distance being reduced. Also,
the proofs of correctness for Prim’s and Kruskal’s algorithm do not assume non-negative weights (whereas
the correctness of Dijkstra’s algorithm relies on the edge weights being non-negative).
Another way to look at this is to add a constant weight to each edge in the graph to make each edge
weight a non-negative value. Prim’s and Kruskal’s algorithms can be applied on this modified graph and
the resulting MST will contain the same edges as the MST in the original graph.
Problem 3.Consider the problem of planning a cross-country road trip. You have a map of Australia consisting
of the locations of towns, each of which has a petrol station, with the corresponding petrol prices (which may be
1

---PAGE_BREAK---

different at each town). You are currently at a particular townsand would like to travel to townt. Your car has a
fuel capacity ofClitres, and for each road on the map, you know the amount of petrol it will take to travel along
it. Your tank can only contain non-negative integer amounts of petrol, and all roads cost an integer amount of
petrol to travel along. You cannot travel along a road if you do not have enough petrol to make it all the way.
You may refuel at any petrol station whether your tank is empty or not (but only to integer values), and you are
not required to fill your tank. Assuming that your tank is initially empty, describe an algorithm for determining
the cheapest way to travel to cityt.[Hint: You should model the problem as a shortest path problem and use
Dijkstra’s algorithm.]
Solution
Our first thought might be to weight the edges of the graph by how much petrol they use and then run
Dijkstra’s algorithm, but this will miss quite a few things. Remember that we need to take into account:
• The cost of petrol at various towns.
• We can fuel up partially at any town, and leave the town with any amount of petrol.
• We might not be able to make it across a road without running out.
In order to account for these things, we create a new graph that encapsulates more information than
just our location on the vertices. Suppose that there arentowns. Let’s make astate-graphthat contains
(C+1)nvertices, one for each possible combination of town and amount of petrol that we could possible
have. That is, each town has(C+1)different vertices, one for when we are in that town with no petrol,
one for when we are there with 1 litre, 2 litres and so on. Let’s use the notation〈u,c〉to denote the vertex
corresponding to townuwhere we haveclitres of petrol currently in the tank.
If a road from townuto townvtakesxlitres of petrol to travel, then for each of the vertices〈u,c〉corre-
sponding to townuwithc≥x, we create an edge to the corresponding vertex〈v,c−x〉of townv. For
example, ifx=5, then we create an edge from〈u, 10〉to〈v, 5〉, and from〈u, 9〉to〈v, 4〉, from〈u, 8〉to〈v, 3〉,
and so on. Importantly, these edges have weight zero, since we are going to use edge weights to model
the cost of purchasing fuel.
To account for buying new fuel, suppose we are currently in the townuwhose petrol price isp. Then we
should add an edge from every vertex〈u,c〉withc<Cto the vertex〈u,c+1〉with weightp. Note that
we could have added edges from〈u,c〉to〈u,c+2〉with weight 2pand so on, but this would just make
the graph unnecessarily denser and hence make the algorithm slower for no reason, so it is best to simply
add edges that add 1 litre of petrol at a time.
We can then run Dijkstra from the vertex〈s, 0〉to find the shortest path to〈t, 0〉, which will be the cheapest
way to make it fromstot.
Notice, the graph we have constructed is denoted as astate-graph, a concept explored in Problem 6 of
Week 5 Applied. The same techniques of modelling a vertex with a state and edges as possible transitions
from a state have been applied here. This concept follows the algorithmic paradigm described in Problem
4 of Week 5 Applied, where the input to the problem is transformed to a representation that can be solved
simply and conveniently using a known unmodified algorithm, which has been the case here with the
final Dijkstra’s call.
Problem 4.Consider a variant of the shortest path problem where instead of finding paths that minimise the
total weight of all edges, we instead wish to minimise the weight of the largest edge appearing on the path. Let’s
refer to such a path as abottleneck path.
(a) Give an example of a graph in which a shortest path between some pair of vertices is not a bottleneck (and
where the graph also contain a bottleneck path which is not a shortest path).
(b) Prove that all of the paths in a minimum spanning treeMof a graphGare bottleneck paths inG.
(c) Prove that not all bottleneck paths ofGare paths in a minimum spanning treeMofG.
2

---PAGE_BREAK---

Solution
(a) Consider the following graph
ab c
d
e f111
1
10
1010
The shortest path fromatodhas total length 13, but it is not a bottleneck path since it uses an edge
of weight 11, while it is possible to travel fromatodusing only weight 10 edges. The bottleneck
path has total length 30 and hence is not a shortest path.
(b) Consider a weighted, connected, undirected graphG, some minimum spanning treeMofG, and a
pair of verticess,t∈V. SinceMis a tree, there is a unique pathpbetweensandtin it. Suppose for
contradiction thatpis not a bottleneck path, i.e. there exists anothers−tpathp′inGsuch that the
maximum edge weight used inp′is strictly less than the maximum edge weight inp. Let’s remove
the heaviest edgeeonpfromM, leaving us with two disconnected subtrees. Sincep′connectss
andtinG, at least one of its edges must jump between these two subtrees, and since every edge
on this path is lighter thane, we can add any such edge back toM, reconnecting it, and yielding a
lighter spanning tree than we had initially. This is a contradiction sinceMwas initially a minimum
spanning tree, and hencepmust be a bottleneck path.
(c) Consider the following graph
a bc
d101
101
The patha→b→dis a bottleneck path, but it is not a part of any minimum spanning tree since
the minimum spanning tree of this graph has weight 12, which is less than 20.
Problem 5.Consider the following algorithm quite similar to Kruskal’s algorithm for producing a minimum
spanning tree of a connected graph:
1:functionMINIMUM_SPANNING_TREE(G=(V , E))
2:sort(E,descending, key((u,v))=w(u,v))//Sort edges in order from heaviest to lightest
3:T=E
4:for eachedgeein nonincreasing orderdo
5:ifT -{e}is connectedthen
6:T=T -{e}
7:returnT
Instead of adding edges in order of weight (lightest first) and keeping the graph acyclic, we remove edges in order
of weight (heaviest first) while keeping the graph from becoming disconnected.
3

---PAGE_BREAK---

(a) Identify a useful invariant maintained by this algorithm.
(b) Prove that this invariant is maintained by the algorithm.
(c) Deduce that this algorithm correctly produces a minimum spanning tree.
Solution
(a) At each iteration,Tis a superset of some minimum spanning tree ofG.
(b) We follow a proof very similar to that of Kruskal’s algorithm. Initially,Tcontains every edge, so it is
definitely a superset of some minimum spanning tree’s edges.
Suppose that at some iteration,Tis a superset of some minimum spanning treeM. Call the next
heaviest edge whose removal does not disconnect the graphe. We need to argue thatT−{e}is a
superset of a minimum spanning tree. Ife/∈M, thenT−{e}is a superset ofMand we are done.
Otherwisee∈M. Suppose we removeefromM, leaving us with two disconnected subtrees. Since
removingefromTdoes not disconnectT, it must be contained in some cycle inT. This cycle must
contain an edgee′̸=ethat connects the two subtrees made by removingefromM. Sinceewas
the heaviest edge whose removal does not disconnect the graph, ande′would also not disconnect
the graph since it is contained in a common cycle withe, we have thatw(e′)≤w(e). Therefore if
we join together the two subtrees formed by removingeby addinge′, we obtain a spanning tree
M′whose weight is
w(M′) =w(M)−w(e) +w(e′)≤w(M),
but sinceMis a minimum spanning treew(M′)≥w(M)and hencew(M′) =w(M)from which we
can deduce thatM′is also a minimum spanning tree. Sincee′∈Tande/∈M′, it is true thatM′is
a subset ofT−{e}and henceT−{e}is a superset of some minimum spanning tree. Therefore the
invariant is maintained.
(c) This algorithm will produce a graph that is connected since it will never remove an edge that causes
a disconnection. Suppose it produces a graph containing a cycle, then it contains an edge whose
removal would not disconnect the graph, but such an edge would be removed by Line 6. Therefore
this algorithm produces a connected graph with no cycles, i.e. a spanning tree. By the invariant
shown in (b), the spanning tree produced must be a superset of some minimum spanning tree, but
since all spanning trees contain the same number of edges, it must itself be a minimum spanning
tree. Therefore this algorithm correctly produces a minimum spanning tree.
Problem 6.Recall from the lecture recordings that breadth-first search can be used to find single-source short-
est paths on unweighted graphs, or equivalently, graphs where all edges have weight one. Consider the similar
problem where instead of only having weight one, edges are now allowed to have weight zero or one. We call this
thezero-oneshortest path problem. Write pseudocode for an algorithm for solving this problem. Your solution
should run inO(V+E)time (this means that you cannot use Dijkstra’s algorithm!)[Hint: Combine ideas from
breadth-first search and Dijkstra’s algorithm]
Solution
Recall that in a breadth-first search, vertices are visited in order by their distance from the source vertex.
Suppose that the vertex at the front of the queue has distanced. Any unvisited adjacent vertices will be
inserted into the back of the queue at distanced+1. This implies that the queue maintained by BFS
always contains vertices whose distances differ by at most one. In essence, the queue contains vertices
on the current level at the front, and vertices on the next level at the back.
We wish to modify BFS to allow it to handle edges with zero weight. Notice that if we wish to traverse an
edge of zero weight, then the target vertex will have the same distance as the current distance. Therefore
we would simply like to insert this vertex not at the back, but at the front of the queue! To support this,
we could use a data structure called a “deque” . A deque is short fordouble-ended queue, which simply
4

---PAGE_BREAK---

means a queue that can be inserted and removed from at both ends. A deque can be implemented quite
easily using a standard dynamic array. Alternatively, if you do not wish to use a deque, you can simply
maintain two queues, one for the vertices at the current distanced, and one for the vertices at the next
distanced+1.
Another interpretation of this algorithm is as a modification of Dijkstra’s. Dijkstra’s algorithm would solve
this problem, but inO((V+E)log(V))complexity, which is a log factor too high due to the use of a heap-
based priority queue. However, as per the observation above, the queue for this algorithm will only ever
contain vertices at distancedand distanced+1, hence we only need a priority queue that supports
having at most two keys at once. Having a double-ended queue and appending the higher keys onto the
end and the smaller keys onto the front satisfies this requirement.
Finally, note that unlike ordinary BFS, we also have to check the distances when visiting neighbours now
since we cannot guarantee that the first time we discover a vertex that we necessarily have the smallest
distance (since we may discover it via a weight one edge when some other node can reach it via a weight
zero edge). This is similar to how Dijkstra’s algorithm relaxes outgoing edges. A pseudocode implemen-
tation in presented below.
1:functionZERO_ONE_BFS(G=(V , E), s)
2:Set dist[1..n] =∞
3:Set pred[1..n] =null
4:Set deque=Deque()
5:deque.push((s, 0))
6:dist[s] =0
7:whiledeque isnotemptydo
8:(u, d)=deque.pop()
9:ifd=dist[u]then//Ignore entries in the queue for out-of-date distances (like Dijkstra’s)
10:for eachvertex v adjacent to udo
11:ifdist[u] +w(u,v)<dist[v]then
12:dist[v] =dist[u] +w(u,v)
13:pred[v] =u
14:ifw(u,v) =0thendeque.push_front((v, dist[v]))//Add to the front of the queue
15:elsedeque.push_back((v, dist[v]))//Add to the back of the queue
There are other ways to solve this problem. One very different solution is to perform a depth-first search
on the graph and find all of the components that are connected by zero-weight edges. Since vertices in
these components can reach each other with zero distance, they will all have the same distances in the
answer, hence these components can be contracted into single vertices, and then we can perform an
ordinary breadth-first search on this contracted graph.
Problem 7.You are the manager of a super computer and receive a set of requests for allocating time frames
in that computer. Thei-th request specifies the starting times iand the finishing timef i. A subset of requests
is compatible if there is no time overlap between any requests in that subset. Develop an algorithm to choose a
compatible subset of maximal size (i.e., you want to accept as many requests as feasible, but you cannot select
incompatible requests).[Hint: Develop a greedy algorithm.]
Solution
The solution to this problem is a greedy algorithm that works as follows. First, the requests are sorted
according to their finishing time. The intuition is that at any point, from the remaining compatible re-
quests, you want to select the one with the smallest finishing time, so that the super computer becomes
available again as soon as possible.
The algorithm loops through the sorted list of requests proceeding as follows: if the request is compatible
5

---PAGE_BREAK---

with the previously chosen requests, then it is selected; otherwise it is discarded.
The idea of the proof of correctness that this algorithm obtains an optimal solution (i.e., a maximal com-
patible subset) is to demonstrate that the solution output by this algorithm “stays ahead” of any other
solution. Leti 1,i2, . . . ,i mbe the subset of requests output by the algorithm (in time order, remember that
this subset is compatible so there is no overlap). Suppose, for contradiction, that there is a bigger com-
patible subset and letj 1,j2, . . . ,j nbe its requests (also in time order) withn>m. Prove by induction that
fik≤f jkfork=1, 2, . . . ,m. But thenj m+1 is compatible withi 1,i2, . . . ,i m, and should have been selected by
the algorithm, which is a contradiction. Therefore the algorithm obtains a compatible subset of maximal
size.
Note that sorting by starting time and proceeding greedily (by processing the requests in increasing order
of starting time and adding the compatible ones) would not work, as the request that starts first can also
be the last one to finish.
The idea of ordering the requests according to the time that they take and proceeding greedily would also
not work. Consider, for instance, the case where the first request starts at 1 and finishes at 10, the second
starts at 9 and finishes at 12, and third request starts at 11 and finishes at 20. The first and third requests
are compatible, but if you select the second request, then you cannot select any other request.
Supplementary Problems
Problem 8.For the union-find data structure, there are multiple heuristics to handle how we union two disjoint-
set trees. One such heuristic is "union-by-size", where the disjoint-set with less elements is appended to the dis-
joint set with more elements. We want to prove that the worst-case cost of all the union operations isO(Vlog(V))
for a disjoint set ofVelements, when using this heuristic.
(a) First prove the following lemma: For any disjoint-set tree constructed via "union-by-size" heuristic, size(r)≥
2height(r), whererrepresents the root node of some disjoint-set tree, size(r)represents the number of nodes
in the disjoint set tree, and height(r)represents the height of the tree.
(b) Using the lemma from part (a), prove that a union takesO(log(V)).
(c) Hence, prove that all the unions takeO(Vlog(V)).
Solution
(a) We will prove the lemma inductively.
Base Case:
When we initialise the union-find data structure, every tree is just a singular node. We have that the
size(r) =1 and the height(r) =0. The proposed lemma clearly holds, hence the base case is true.
Inductive step:
Assume that afterkunions the statement is true for all disjoint-set trees in the data structure. In
the(k+1)-th union, say we are merging two disjointed-set trees, rooted atsandr. Without loss of
generality let’s assume that size(r)≥size(s)which means the tree rooted atsis put beneathr.
After performing the(k+1)-th merge we denote the old size and height as as size(r), height(r)and
the new size and height as size′(r), height′(r).
Case 1: height(r)>height(s)
After performing the(k+1)-th merge we have
size′(r)≥size(r)
6

---PAGE_BREAK---

We then invoke our hypothesis where size(r)≥2height(r). Therefore
size′(r)≥2height(r)
Since height(r)>height(s)and the disjoint-set tree rooted atsis put beneathr, we must have
height(r) =height′(r). Therefore we have that
size′(r)≥2height′(r)
This proves the lemma for this case.
Case 2: height(r)≤height(s)
After performing the(k+1)-th merge we have
size′(r) =size(r) +size(s)
From our assumption of size(r)≥size(s), we have that
size′(r)≥2×size(s)
We then invoke our hypothesis where size(s)≥2height(s). Therefore we have that
size′(r)≥2×2height(s)
≥2height(s)+1
As we are putting the disjoint-set tree rooted atsbeneathr, and height(r)≤height(s), we must
then have height′(r) =height(s) +1. Therefore we have
size′(r)≥2height′(r)
This proves the lemma for this case. Therefore, by induction, it is true that size(r)≥2height(r).
(b) The cost of any union is simplyO(height(r) +height(s)). It follows from the lemma above that
size(r)≥2height(r),
log2(size(r))≥height(r).
Since size(r)for a disjoint set ofVelements is bounded byV. We have that
log2(V)≥height(r).
Similarly, we can show that
log2(V)≥height(s).
Thus any union is worst caseO(log(V)).
(c) A union operation is only ever performed if two nodes are in different disjoint-sets. Thus, in the
worst-case lifespan of the union-find data structure ofVelements, onlyV−1 unions can be per-
formed. Using the above it follows that the worst-case cost of all the unions isO(Vlog(V)).
Problem 9.Suppose that we wish to solve the single-source shortest path problem for graphs with non-negative
bounded integer edge weights, i.e. there is a constantcsuch that for all edges(u,v)it holds that 0≤w(u,v)≤c.
Explain how we can modify Dijkstra’s algorithm to run inO(V+E)time in this case.[Hint: Improve the priority
queue]
7

---PAGE_BREAK---

Solution
The part of Dijkstra’s algorithm that adds the log factor is the priority queue, so let’s try to improve that.
Given that the edge weights are bounded above byc, and a shortest path can contain at mostV−1 edges,
the largest distance estimate that we can ever have is less thanc V. Also observe that since we remove
vertices from the priority queue in distance order, the minimum element in the priority queue never
decreases. We can use these two facts to make a faster priority queue for Dijkstra’s.
Let’s just store an array of sizec V, where at each entry, we store a linked list of vertices who have that
distance estimate. Adding an element to this priority queue takesO(1)since we can simply append to
the corresponding linked list. Updating a distance estimate can also be achieved inO(1)since we can
append to linked lists in O(1) (using the approach to implementing Dijkstra described in the notes). Since
the minimum distance for entries obtained from priority queue never decreases, we can simply move
through the priority queue, starting at distance zero and moving onto the next distance when there are
no vertices left to process at the current distance. We never move back to a previous distance.
All updates to the priority queue takeO(1). Finding the minimum element in the priority queue could
take up toO(V), but note that since we never go backwards, the total time complexity ofallfind minimum
operations will beO(V), since scanning all of the distances takesO(c V) =O(V)ascis a constant. The
total time complexity of Dijkstra’s using this priority queue will therefore beO(V+E).
Problem 10.Consider the following supposed invariant for Kruskal’s algorithm: At each iteration, each con-
nected component in the current spanning forest is a minimum spanning tree of the vertices in that component.
(a) Prove or disprove whether Kruskal’s algorithm maintains this invariant.
(b) Can this invariant be used to prove that Kruskal’s algorithm is correct?
Solution
(a) Kruskal’s algorithm does maintain this invariant, as it is a strictly weaker version of the invariant
we usually show for Kruskal. Recall that Kruskal’s maintains that the current set of selected edges
is always a subset of some minimum spanning tree. LetGbe a weighted, connected, undirected
graph and letTbe a subset of some minimum spanningMtree ofG. Consider a connected com-
ponent ofT. Suppose for contradiction that this component is not a minimum spanning tree on
its vertices. Then we could replace the edges of this component inMwith the edges of a minimum
spanning tree on these vertices and reduce the weight ofM, meaning thatMwas not a minimum
spanning tree. This is a contradiction, and hence all of the connected components ofTmust be
minimum spanning trees on their respective vertices.
(b) Despite the fact that Kruskal’s maintains this invariant, it is not strong enough to prove the algo-
rithm’s correctness. Consider the following graph for example.
a bc d
1 1
1010
The edges(a,b)and(c,d)are both minimum spanning trees of their connected components, but
no matter how we connect them, we will not obtain a minimum spanning tree for the entire graph.
Therefore this invariant alone is too weak to show that Kruskal’s is correct.
8

---PAGE_BREAK---

Note:Clearly the situation above could never actually arise during the execution of Kruskal’s algo-
rithm (because Kruskal’s is correct, which we have proven elsewhere). It is, however, a valid coun-
terexample to the suggested invariant.
Problem 11.Consider the following state of a union-find data structure:
01 2
3 4 5 6 7
89
(a) Perform the followingunion()calls sequentially using theunion-by-rankandpath compressionheuris-
tics, visualising the outcome.
(i)union(4, 0)
(ii)union(8, 3)
(iii)union(9, 0)
(b) Compare the difference between the final state of the forest and the state of the forest if you were to use
theunion-by-sizeheuristic alone.
Solution
(a) (i)union(4, 0)
01
2
34 5
6 7 89
(ii)union(8, 3)
Unlike in the preparation sheet, although element 8 and 3 are part of the same component,
during the twofind()calls within theunion()call, thepath compressiontechnique will
cause both the parents of 8 and 3 to become 1, allowing for faster future queries.
9

---PAGE_BREAK---

01
2 3 4 5
6 789
(iii)union(9, 0)
In addition to the appended element 9, when the root element for 0 was found,path compres-
sionwould set its parent directly to this root element as a side-effect.
01
2 3 4 5
6 78 9
(b) The state of the union-find data structure and the remainingunion()calls is identical to the con-
text in Preparation Sheet 6 Problem 3, where the provided solution in part (h) onwards illustrates
the outcomes usingunion-by-size.
The final merged tree, usingunion-by-rankandpath compression, has a height of 2, which is one
less than the final height of the tree usingunion-by-size. Whilst this may seem small, on the large
scale, theunion-by-rankheuristic is a better choice thanunion-by-sizeas it is more pragmatic to
keep the height of the trees smaller. This series of unions illustrate the benefit ofunion-by-rank,
aspath compressionhad no effect in theunion(4, 0)call, attributing the direct height difference
to theunion-by-rankheuristic alone. Theunion(8, 3)andunion(9, 0)calls showcase the
benefits ofpath compressionand how it helps make the tree shallow and wide, allowing for almost
O(1)query times.
10