Week 5 Applied Sheet
(Solutions)
Useful advice:The following solutions pertain to the theoretical problems given in the applied classes. You are
strongly advised to attempt the problems thoroughly before looking at these solutions. Simply reading the solu-
tions without thinking about the problems will rob you of the practice required to be able to solve complicated
problems on your own. You will perform poorly on the exam if you simply attempt to memorise solutions to
these problems. Thinking about a problem, even if you do not solve it, will greatly increase your understanding
of the underlying concepts. Solutions are typically not provided for Python implementation questions. In some
cases, pseudocode may be provided where it illustrates a particular useful concept.
Problems
Problem 1.Devise an algorithm for determining whether a given undirected graph is two-colourable. A graph
is two-colourable if each vertex can be assigned a colour, black or white, such that no two adjacent vertices are
the same colour. Your algorithm should run inO(V+E)time. Write pseudocode for your algorithm.
Solution
To two colour a graph, the key observation to make is that once we pick a colour for a particular vertex,
the colours of all of its neighbours must be the opposite. That is, once we decide on a colour for one
vertex, all other reachable vertices must be set accordingly, we do not get to make any more decisions.
Secondly, it does not matter whether we decide to set the first vertex to white or to black, since changing
from one to the other will just swap the colour of every other vertex. With these observations in mind, we
can proceed greedily.
Let’s perform depth-first search on the graph, and for each vertex, if it has not been coloured yet, select
an arbitrary colour and then recursively colour all of its neighbours the opposite colour. If at any point
a vertex sees that one of its neighbours has the same colour as it, we know that the graph is not two-
colourable. Here is some pseudocode that implements this idea.
1:functionTWO_COLOUR(G=(V , E))
2:Set colour[1..n] =null
3:for eachvertex u=1tondo
4:ifcolour[u] =null then
5:ifDFS(u, BLACK)=False then
6:return False
7:return True, colour[1..n]
8:
9://Returns true if the component was successfully coloured
10:functionDFS(u, c)
11:colour[u] =c
12:for eachvertex v adjacent to udo
13:ifcolour[v] =cthen//A neighbour has the same colour as us!
14:return False
15:else ifcolour[v] =null andDFS(v, opposite(c))=False then
16:return False
17:return True
Here, opposite(c) is a function that returnsWHITEorBLACKif c isBLACKorWHITErespectively.
1

---PAGE_BREAK---

Problem 2.Describe an algorithm for counting the number of valid two colourings of a given undirected graph.
Solution
First, run the algorithm from Problem 1 to check whether the graph is two colourable at all. If it is not,
return zero. Otherwise, observe that after selecting a colour for a vertex, every other vertex in the same
component is fixed to a particular colour. We can therefore colour each component two ways, hence the
total number of possible colourings is
2number of connected components.
We can compute the number of connected components using depth-first search, so this algorithm takes
O(V+E)time.
Problem 3.This problem is about cycle finding as discussed in the course notes.
(a) Explain using an example why the algorithm given for finding cycles in an undirected graph does not work
when applied to a directed graph.
(b) Describe an algorithm based on depth-first search that determines whether a given directed graph con-
tains any cycles. Your algorithm should run inO(V+E)time. Write pseudocode for your algorithm.
Solution
The undirected cycle finding algorithm works by checking whether the depth-first search encounters an
edge to a vertex that has already been visited. This works fine for undirected graphs, but when the graph
is directed, this might yield false positives since there could be multiple paths to the same vertex with the
edges in the same direction, which does not constitute a cycle. For example, the algorithm would falsely
identify this as a cycle:
ab
cd
To correct this, we need to think a bit more carefully about the edges that depth-first search examines
during traversal. In a different example like the following, the cyclea,b,dif identified would in fact be
correct, whileb,c,e,dwould not.
ab c
d e
How do we distinguish between the two? Suppose that the edges traversed by the search are those high-
lighted below.
2

---PAGE_BREAK---

ab c
d e
The critical observation is that when the search looks along the edge(d,e)and sees thatehas already
been visited, we see that the branch that visitedeis a different branch than the one that visitedd. Because
of this, the edges will be in the same direction, and hence not a cycle. However, when the search looks
along the edge(d,a)and notices thatahas already been visited, we observe thatais a parent of the
current branch of the search tree. This means that there is a path froma⇝d, and since we just discovered
an edged→a, we have found a directed cycle!
So, to write an algorithm for directed cycle finding we need to perform a depth-first search and keep track
of which branches of the search tree are still active, and which ones are finished. Whenever we encounter
an edge to an already visited vertex, we identify it as a cycle only if the target vertex is still active, otherwise
it is part of a different branch and hence not part of a cycle. Therefore instead of marking each vertex
as visited or not, we will have three possible states, unvisited, inactive, and active. A vertex is active if
its descendants are still being explored. Once we finish exploring a node’s descendants, we mark it as
inactive. The algorithm might then look like the following
1:functionCYCLE_DETECTION(G=(V , E))
2:Set status[1..n] =Unvisited
3:for eachvertex u=1tondo
4:ifstatus[u] ==Unvisited andDFS(u)then
5:return True
6:return False
7:
8:functionDFS(u)
9:status[u] =Active
10:for eachvertex v adjacent to udo
11:ifstatus[v] =Active then//We found a cycle
12:return True
13:else ifstatus[v] =Unvisited andDFS(v)=True then
14:return True
15:status[u] =Inactive//Finished this branch - mark as inactive
16:return False
Problem 4.In this question we consider a variant of the single-source shortest path problem, themulti-source
shortest pathproblem. In this problem, we are given an unweighted graph and a set of many source vertices. We
wish to find for every vertexvin the graph, the minimum distance to any one of the source vertices. Formally,
given the sourcess 1,s2, ...s k, we wish to find for every vertexv
d[v] =min
1≤i≤kdist(v,s i).
Describe how to solve this problem using a modification to breadth-first search. Your algorithm should run in
O(V+E)time.
Solution
The solution to this problem is rather simple. We perform a breadth-first search on the graph, but instead
of beginning with a single vertex in the queue at distance zero, we place all of the given source vertices
3

---PAGE_BREAK---

in the queue with distance zero. The algorithm then proceeds exactly the same. This works because the
breadth-first search will discover all of the vertices that are a distance one from every source vertex before
discovering vertices of distance two and so on. If a vertex has already been discovered via another source,
then the breadth-first search can safely ignore it since the first source to find it must be the closest one.
An alternate solution is to add a newsuper sourcevertex to the graph and connect it to all of the given
sources. After performing breadth-first search from the super source, the distances to all of the vertices
will be one greater than the answer, since we had to travel along one additional edge from the super
source to the real sources. Therefore we can subtract one from each of the distances and return those.
Notice, that thesuper sourcetechnique actually devolves into the initial solution described. The first
iteration of BFS would add all the neighbours of the source vertex to the queue, and since we designed the
super source to connect to all the other sources, at the end of this iteration, the queue would contain all
the sources, however this time, offset with a distance of 1. These two approaches highlight an important
algorithmic paradigm that will help you solve many algorithmic problems. Generally, you can modify a
closely related algorithm to solve a given problem, however, in highly complex situations, modifying the
algorithm can be difficult as well as risky as you may inadvertently affect the correctness of the algorithm.
Instead, the second approach, modifying the input, is usually more favourable, opting to transform or
map the provided problem context into another such that a known algorithm can solve it. In such a
scenario, the algorithm can be treated as a black box and untouched, making is safer to guarantee its
correctness, as long as you can guarantee the transformation of the problem is valid. In this problem, the
graph was transformed via the introduction of asuper sourcevertex, allowing us to use the BFS algorithm
as a black box, followed by the small post-processing of subtracting 1 off all the distances. This type of
thinking will be very valuable going forward.
Problem 5.Suppose we have some unweighted and undirected graph where there exists two types of edges:
solid and dotted. These graphs have a special property where, for any path, you cannot traverse over consecutive
dotted edges. This means that if a dotted edge was used, the immediate next edge must be a solid edge. Your
task is to develop a shortest distance algorithm for this problem constraint, from verticesstot.
(a) Consider the optimal path fromstotin the following graph.
s ab
t
Does naively performing the shortest path BFS algorithm solve this problem? If yes, does it hold for all
possible graphs? If no, explain why not and what the issue is generally.
(b) Astate-graphis a graph where each vertex represents a unique state or configuration in a problem, and
edges represent valid transitions between them. This structure allows us to model complex problems in
a way that can be explored using the regular graph algorithms you have learnt. In the regular shortest
path problem, the state is simply the current location/vertex. For this problem, describe a possible state
in terms of two variables that can model every unique situation we can exist in.
[Hint: The current vertex alone is not enough as there is another variable in this context that controls which
vertices you can go to next.]
(c) Edges represent possible ways to transition from one state to another state. Explain which vertices to con-
nect together in thestate-graphand why.
(d) Draw the resultingstate-graphfor the graph in part (a) using the rules described in parts (b) and (c).
4

---PAGE_BREAK---

(e) Describe an algorithm that returns the shortest distance for these types of graphs given a start vertex,s,
and destination vertex,t.
Solution
(a) No, the shortest path BFS algorithm will not solve the problem and the provided graph is an appro-
priate counter-example. This graph is designed in such a way that the destination node canonly
be reached by a dotted edge. This way, if we arrive at the preceeding vertex from a dotted edge we
must first take an available solid edge out and back to allow us to use the final dotted edge to the
destination vertex,t.
The optimal solution fromstotwould bes→a→b→a→t, which revisits vertexa. The reason
why traditional BFS fails is due to possible graphs where you need torevisita vertex in order to
reacht, which is the case here.
(b) Notice that the required context along travelling through a path depends on two things: 1) which
vertex we are at and 2) whether we just came from a dotted edge. These two variables uniquely
capture every possible state we can exist in. Therefore, the suggested state to model is:
v=〈Current Vertex, Was Previous Edge Dotted〉
(c) The neighbours of a vertex and the corresponding type of edge will indicate whether we can make a
valid connection to another state. If we are at a vertex,u, and the last edge type we used was solid,
then proceeding to any neighbour, either via a solid or dotted edge, is fine.
Hence, for every neighbourvofufrom asolidedge, we can create a directed edge from〈u, False〉
to〈v, False〉. For every neighbourvofufrom adottededge, we can create a directed edge from
〈u, False〉to〈v, True〉.
If instead the last edge we used was dotted, then we can only consider neighbours reachable by a
solid edge. Hence, for every neighbourvofufrom asolidedge, we can create a directed edge from
〈u, True〉to〈v, False〉.
Adding these connections completes thestate-graph.
(d) Applying the logic in parts (b) and (c) to the graph in part (a) would result in thestate-graphbelow.
〈s,F〉
〈s,T〉
〈a,F〉〈a,T〉
〈b,F〉
〈b,T〉〈t,F〉
〈t,T〉
Note, we are now dealing with adirectedgraph instead.
(e) Now we can simply do a BFS, however we need to provide a reference start vertex. Our starting
state would be〈s, False〉since we are permitted to use either dotted or solid edges when we begin
traversing. The result would be the minimum distance found between〈t, False〉and〈t, True〉since
it does not matter whether we arrived attfrom a dotted edge or not. The graph below highlights
the path BFS would eventually find to reacht.
5

---PAGE_BREAK---

〈s,F〉
〈s,T〉
〈a,F〉〈a,T〉
〈b,F〉
〈b,T〉〈t,F〉
〈t,T〉
Notice, visiting a node twice in the example graph in part (a) is now separated into going through
two different states,〈a, True〉and〈a, False〉.
Since the rules of creating the vertices and edges of thestate-graphare now well-defined, as well as
the reference start vertex and which distance to return, we can run the shortest path BFS algorithm
on thestate-graphand return the result found asmin(dist[t, False], dist[t, True]).
Problem 6.Describe an efficient algorithm for finding theshortestcycle in an unweighted, directed graph. A
shortest cycle is a cycle with the minimum possible number of edges. Write pseudocode for your algorithm.
Solution
Since we are asking for the shortest cycle, the first thing that we should try is breadth-first search since it
visits vertices in order of distance. Suppose that we run the ordinary cycle detection algorithm but using
a breadth-first search in place of depth-first search. Will this find the shortest cycle for us? Unfortunately
not. See the following example in which we start the search from the sources.
s ab
c
de fg
h
The cyclea,b,c,dis of length four and a distance of one from the source, and it will be found by the time
the search reaches a distance five. However, the shortest cyclef,g,his distance five away, and will not
be found until the search reaches distance eight.
To fix this, let’s simply perform multiple breadth-first searches, one from every possible source vertex. If
the source vertex is contained within a cycle of lengthk, then the cycle will be detected when the search
reaches distancek, before any longer cycle has had a chance to be detected. By trying every possible
source, we are therefore guaranteed to find the shortest cycle. This solution will takeO(V(V+E))time
since we perform|V|breadth-first searches and each one takesO(V+E)time.
Notice finally that if we are searching from a vertex contained inside the shortest cycle, then the first
already-visited vertex encountered will in fact be the source itself, so we can just check for that in our
implementation.
1:functionSHORTEST_CYCLE(G=(V , E))
2:Set best_found=∞
3:for eachvertex s=1tondo//Try every vertex as the source
6

---PAGE_BREAK---

4:best_found=min(best_found,BFS(s))
5:returnbest_found
6:
7:functionBFS(s)
8:Set dist[1..n] =∞
9:dist[s] =0
10:Set queue=Queue()
11:queue.push(s)
12:whilequeue isnotemptydo
13:u=queue.pop()
14:for eachvertex v adjacent to udo
15:ifv=sthen//We made it back to the source – we found a cycle!
16:returndist[u] +1
17:else ifdist[v] ==∞then
18:dist[v] =dist[u] +1
19:queue.push(v)
20:return∞
Have a think about how you would solve this problem for undirected graphs. The same general ideas
work, but some extra care is needed to account for some situations that do not appear in the directed
case.
Problem 7.Write pseudocode for an algorithm that counts the number of connected components in an undi-
rected graph that arepurecycles. This means the component itself is just a cycle, where a cycle is a non-empty
sequence of edges(u 1,u2),(u 2,u3), ...(u k,u1)such thatu 1,u2, . . . ,u kare all distinct vertices. If a component con-
tains a cycle but also other edges, then it should not be counted.
Solution
To solve this problem, we notice that for a component to be a cycle, it must be the case that the degree
(number of adjacent edges) of every vertex is exactly two. Armed with this fact, the solution to this prob-
lem is to perform a depth-first search much like the ordinary connected components algorithm and add
in a check to see whether the degree of a vertex is not two.
1:functionCOUNT_CYCLE_COMPONENTS(G=(V , E))
2:Set visited[1..n] =False
3:Set num_components=0
4:for eachvertex u=1 tondo
5:ifvisited[u] ==False then
6:ifDFS(u)then
7:num_components=num_components+1
8:returnnum_components
9:
10://Return true if the component containing u is a simple cycle
11:functionDFS(u)
12:visited[u] =True
13:Set is_cycle=True ifdegree(u)=2else False
14:for eachvertex v adjacent to udo
15:ifvisited[v] ==False then
16:ifDFS(v)=False then
17:is_cycle=False
18:returnis_cycle
7

---PAGE_BREAK---

Supplementary Problems
Problem 8.Describe an algorithm that can determine if a given graph is bipartite.
Solution
Recall that the definition of a bipartite graph is that it can be divided into two sets,UandV, with every
edge having one vertex in setUand the other in setV. In other words, every neighbour of a vertex in set
Umust be in setVand every neighbour of a vertex in setVmust be in setU. To enforce that a vertex’s
neighbours are all part of another set whilst their neighbours are part of the initial set sounds similar to
the two-colourable problem. In fact, it is the exact same thing. A graph is bipartiteif and only ifit is
two-colourable. The following two-way argument proves this relationship.
If a graph is bipartite, then you can successfully colour all vertices inUas white and all vertices inVas
black, and since all edges will be between white and black, the graph is two-colourable.
If a graph is two-colourable, then there exists no edge between white vertices alone and black vertices
alone. Therefore, we can group all the white vertices as a set and all the black vertices as another set. This
completes the setup for a bipartite graph and hence it must be bipartite.
To solve this problem, we can simply run the algorithm designed in Problem 1 as it determines if the given
graph is two-colourable and therefore it will also detect if the given graph is bipartite.
Problem 9.Write pseudocode for a non-recursive implementation of depth-first search that uses a stack instead
of recursion.
Solution
The function looks almost identical to the recursive version. We simply replace the recursive calls by
pushing the corresponding vertex onto the stack, and loop until the stack is empty.
1:functionDFS(u)
2:Create empty stack
3:stack.push(u)
4:whilestackis not empty do
5:u=stack.pop()
6:visited[u] =True
7:for eachvertex v adjacent to udo
8:if notvisited[v]then
9:stack.push(v)
Problem 10.Argue that the algorithm given in the course notes for detecting whether an undirected graph
contains a cycle actually runs inO(V)time, notO(V+E)time, i.e. its complexity is independent of|E|.
Solution
If the given graph is acyclic, thenE≤V−1, so the ordinary depth-first search complexity ofO(V+E)
is justO(V). If instead the graph contains a cycle, then the depth-first search will find it as soon as it
examines an edge to an already-visited vertex. Up until this point, none of the edges examined led to
already-visited vertices, so they formed a forest of depth-first search trees, which means that there were
at mostV−1 of them. After we examine the cycle-producing edge, the algorithm immediately terminates,
and hence it did at mostO(V)work in total.
Problem 11.Consider a directed acyclic graph representing the hierarchical structure ofnemployees at a
company. Each employee may have one or many employees as their superior. The company has decided to
8

---PAGE_BREAK---

give raises tomof the top employees. Unfortunately, you are not sure exactly how the company decides who is
considered the top employees, but you do know for sure that a person will not receive a raise unless all of their
superiors do.
Describe an algorithm that given the company DAG and the value ofm, determines which employees are guaran-
teed to receive a raise, and which are guaranteed to not receive a raise. Your algorithm should run inO(V2+V E)
time.
Solution
We can rephrase this problem in terms of topological orderings. An employee will receive a raise if they
are among the topmemployees, which means that they must be in the firstmelements of a topological
order. However, we can not simply compute a topological order and check the firstmelements since the
order is not guaranteed to be unique. More concretely, an employee is guaranteed a raise if they are in
the firstmelements ofeverypossible topological order. Similarly, an employee is guaranteed to not get
a raise if they are never in the firstmelements inanytopological order.
In order to determine this, consider a particular vertexvin a directed acyclic graph. The vertices that
must come after it in a topological ordering are all of the vertices that it can reach, since they are all of
its dependants. Conversely, all of the vertices that must come beforevare the ones that can reachv. All
other vertices could go before or afterv.
Therefore we want to count for each employee, the number of employees that are reachable in the com-
pany DAG, and conversely, the number of employees that can reach them in the company DAG. We can
count the number of vertices reachable from a particular employee inO(V+E)time with a simple depth-
first search. Similarly, to count the number of employees that reach them, we can perform a depth-first
search in the company DAG with all of the edges reversed. Let the number of reachable employees be
r, and the number of employees that reach them bes. An employee is guaranteed to be in the firstm
elements of any topological order if and only if
r≥n−m.
Similarly, an employee is guaranteed to not be in the firstmelements if and only if
s≥m.
We can therefore run this procedure for every employee and output the results. We perform two depth-
first searches per employee, takingO(V+E)time each, and hence the total time complexity isO(V2+V E)
as required.
Problem 12.A Hamiltonian path in a graphG= (V,E)is a path inGthat visits every vertexv∈Vexactly once.
On general graphs, computing Hamiltonian paths is NP-Hard. Describe an algorithm that finds a Hamiltonian
path in a directed acyclic graph inO(V+E)time or reports that one does not exist.
Solution
A Hamiltonian path must begin at some vertex and then travel through every other vertex without ever
revisiting a previous one. The first thing to note is that the starting vertex must therefore be a vertex with
no incoming edges, since such a vertex can never be visited in any other way by the path. This means that
a Hamiltonian path will not exist if there are multiple such vertices. This should remind us of something
similar, topological orderings!
Let’s argue that a Hamiltonian path must be a topological ordering of a graph. Consider the sequence of
vertices in a Hamiltonian path. If a vertex has an edge that travels to a previous vertex (meaning that the
two are out of topological order), then this would produce a cycle in the graph, which is impossible since
the graph is acyclic by assumption. Therefore a Hamiltonian path, if one exists, is a topological order of
9

---PAGE_BREAK---

the graph.
Suppose that a Hamiltonian path exists. Therefore, for every pair of vertices in the graph, one must be an
ancestor of the other. This means that for any pair of vertices, we can determine which one must appear
earlier in any possible topological order. Therefore, there is a unique topological order.
Finally, suppose that there is a unique topological order, then this implies that there are no pairs of ver-
tices in the order that are not adjacent, since otherwise they could be swapped without breaking the
dependency constraints. Since every pair of vertices in the order must be adjacent, this constitutes a
Hamiltonian path.
We can conclude that a Hamiltonian path exists if and only if the graph has a unique topological order,
and if so, the Hamiltonian path is the topological order. So we can just find any topological order (in case
there is a unique topological order, it will be the one found) and test whether there is a path visiting all
vertices in that order (in which case a Hamiltonian path exists).
Problem 13. (Advanced)Given a directed graphGin adjacency matrix form, determine whether it contains a
“universal sink” vertex. A universal sink is a vertexvwith in-degree|V|−1 and out-degree 0, ie. a vertex such that
every other vertex in the graph has an edge tov, butvhas no edge to any other vertex.Your algorithm should
run inO(V)time.Note that this means that you cannot read the entire adjacency matrix and meet the required
complexity.
Solution
This problem is quite tricky, as we are not allowed to even read the entire input if we are to solve it in the
required complexity. This means that we need a way to eliminate nodes from consideration very quickly.
Let’s make some observations that will help. First of all, there can only be one universal sink if any, since
if every vertex has an edge tov, then no other vertex has no outgoing edges. For a node to be a universal
sink, it must have no outgoing edges, which means that its row in the adjacency matrix must contain all
zeros. It must also have every possible incoming edge, which means that its column should contain all
ones except on the main diagonal. This means that if we look at an entryA[i][j]in the adjacency matrix,
we can deduce the following:
1. IfA[i][j] =1, then vertexiis definitely not a universal sink, since it has an outgoing edge.
2. IfA[i][j] =0 andi̸=j, then vertexjis definitely not a universal sink, sink it is missing an incoming
edge.
This means that every time we look at an entry in the matrix (except the diagonal), we get to discard
someone from consideration. This is good. We just need a way to never consider the same vertex twice,
and we are in the clear. To do so, let’s start by making a linked list containing all of the vertices. We will
also make an arraybad[1..n]such thatbad[v]isTrueif we have eliminatedvfrom consideration.
With all of this set up, we do the following. For each column of the adjacency matrix, check whether this
vertex has already been discarded, and if so, move to the next column. If it has not, examine the entries in
this column. If we find a 1, then mark that row as bad. If we find a 0 not on the diagonal, mark the current
column as bad and move on. This is almost fast enough, except that we might scan top-to-bottom too
many columns, leading toO(V2)complexity. This is where the linked list comes in. Whenever we wish
to scan a column, scan only the elements presently in the linked list (except the diagonal). Therefore, for
every element that is scanned, one bad vertex is encountered. The bad vertex is removed from the linked
list so that we never have to consider it ever again (thus the total complexity of this part will beO(V)).
When there is only one remaining candidate vertex, using the adjacency matrix, we can trivially check in
timeO(V)if it is a universal sink or not.
Problem 14. (Advanced)This problem is about determining another interesting property of a graphG, namely
itsbridges. A bridge is an edge that if removed from the graph would increase the number of connected compo-
10

---PAGE_BREAK---

nents in the graph. For example, in the following graph, the bridges are highlighted:
(a) Prove that an edge is a bridge if and only if it does not lie on any simple cycle inG.
(b) Suppose that we number the vertices ofGin the order that they are visited by depth-first search. Denote
this quantity bydfs_ord[v]for each vertexv. Define the following quantitylow_link[v]for each vertex
vsuch that
low_link[v] =min¨
dfs_ord[v],
dfs_ord[u]: for any vertexureachable fromvvia unused edges after visitingv
Explain how the quantitylow_linkcan be computed inO(V+E)time.
(c) Explain how the quantitiesdfs_numandlow_linkcan be used to determine which edges are bridges.
(d) Write pseudocode that uses the above facts to implement an algorithm based on depth-first search for
determining the bridges of a given undirected graph inO(V+E)time.
Solution
(a) Given a graphG, suppose that an edgee∈Eis a bridge such that its removal would disconnect two
verticesuandv. We will show thatecannot lie on a cycle. Suppose for contradiction thatelies
on a cycle. There was originally a pathu⇝vthat went through the edgee, ie.u⇝e in→e out⇝v.
Sinceeis on a cycle, there is a path around the cyclee in⇝e out. Therefore there is a pathu⇝e in⇝
eout⇝v, henceuandvare not disconnected which is a contradiction.
Now suppose thateis not a bridge, ie. there is no pair of connected verticesu,vwho can only reach
each other by crossinge. We will show thatelies on a cycle. Consider the pair of verticesu=e inand
v=e out. Sinceeis not a bridge anduandvare in the same connected component, there is a path
fromutovthat does not use the edgee. Sinceeconnectsuandv, we have thatu⇝
Not viaev→
euis
therefore a cycle.
(b) We can computelow_linkby noticing that the low link of a particular vertexvis the minimum
low link of all vertices adjacent tovvia unused edges. This is because if we can reach vertexuvia
some path of length longer than one, then one of the vertices that we are adjacent to is on that path
and can therefore also reach it. In other words, we can write
low_link[v] =min 
dfs_ord[v],min
u∈V
uadjacent tov
(u,v)unusedlow_link[u]!
.
This means that at each vertexvduring depth-first search, we should traverse all of our children and
then update ourlow_linkto the minimum out of all of our adjacent vertices that are connected
to us by an unused edge. This requires only a constant amount of extra work for each edge in the
graph during depth-first search, hence it can be computed inO(V+E)time.
(c) Observe thatlow_link[v]describes the earliest vertex that we can travel back to after reachingv
for the first time without using any already-used edges. If it is possible to travel tov’s parentu, then
we could travel fromvtouand then back down tovand hence there is a cycle containing the edge
(u,v). If we can travel to any vertex that we visited beforeu, then we can travel from there tou
by following the edges that the depth-first search took and hence there is a cycle containing(u,v).
11

---PAGE_BREAK---

Otherwise if it is not possible to reach any vertex that we visited beforev, then there is no way to
cycle back tovand hence there is no cycle containing(u,v). Let(u,v)be an edge oriented in the
direction that the depth-first search traverses it. Using the observation above,(u,v)is a bridge if
and only if
low_link[v]>dfs_num[u].
(d) Since we can computedfs_ordandlow_linkinO(V+E)time and use them to determine the
bridges, we can determine the bridges inO(V+E)time as well.
1:functionFIND_BRIDGES(G=(V , E))
2:Set dfs_counter=1
3:Set dfs_ord[u] =low_link[u] =nullfor allu∈V
4:for eachvertex u=1tondo
5:ifdfs_ord[u] =null then
6: DFS(u)
7:
8:functionDFS(u)
9:dfs_ord[u] =low_link[u] =dfs_counter
10:dfs_counter=dfs_counter+1
11:forall edgese= (u,v)adjacent toudo
12:ifedgeehas not been traversed yetthen
13:ifdfs_ord[v] =null then
14:Markeas traversed
15: DFS(v)
16:iflow_link[v]>dfs_ord[u]then
17:The edgeeis a bridge
18:low_link[u] =min(low_link[u], low_link[v])
12