Week 11 Applied Sheet
(Solutions)
Useful advice:The following solutions pertain to the theoretical problems given in the applied classes. You are
strongly advised to attempt the problems thoroughly before looking at these solutions. Simply reading the solu-
tions without thinking about the problems will rob you of the practice required to be able to solve complicated
problems on your own. You will perform poorly on the exam if you simply attempt to memorise solutions to
these problems. Thinking about a problem, even if you do not solve it, will greatly increase your understanding
of the underlying concepts. Solutions are typically not provided for Python implementation questions. In some
cases, pseudocode may be provided where it illustrates a particular useful concept.
Problems
Problem 1.LetGbe a flow network and letfbe a valid flow onG. Prove that the net outflow out ofsis equal
to the net inflow intot.
Solution
Suppose the set of all vertices isV. We know that the flow of every cut is equal to the flow of the network.
Therefore the flow of the cut({s},V\{s})- which is the flow out ofs- must equal the flow of the cut
(V\{t},{t})- which is the flow intot.
Problem 2.Consider a variant of the maximum flow problem in which we allow for multiple source vertices and
multiple sink vertices. We retain all of the capacity and flow conservation constraints of the original maximum
flow problem. As in the original problem, all of the sources and sinks are excluded from the flow conservation
constraint. Describe a simple method for solving this problem.
Solution
We create a new graph by adding a “super-source” vertex and a “super-sink” vertex. The super source is
connected to each source by an edge with capacity equal to the total capacities of all the outgoing edges
from that source. Similarly, each sink is connected by an edge to the super sink, and the capacity of that
edge is equal to the total capacities of all incoming edges to that sink. We then solve the flow problem on
this new graph as normal.
Problem 3.Given a list ofnintegersr 1,r2, ...,r nandmintegersc 1,c2, ...,c m, we wish to determine whether there
exists ann×mmatrixXconsisting of zeros and ones whose row sums arer 1,r2, ...,r nrespectively and whose
column sums arec 1,c2, ...,c mrespectively. It is assumed that the sum of the r’s is equal to the sum of the c’s
(otherwise it is trivially impossible to satisfy the constraints). Describe an algorithm for solving this problem by
using a flow network.
Solution
Construct a flow network as follows: Create two sets of vertices,AandB. Each vertex inA(a 1,a2, ...a n)
corresponds to one of thenrows, and each vertex inB(b 1,b2, ...b m) corresponds to one of themcolumns.
Add a source and a sink. For 1≤i≤n, add an edge from the source toa iwith capacityr i. For each 1≤j≤
m, add an edge from vertexb jto the sink with capacityc j. Add edgese i,jbetween every pair of vertices
(ai,bj) with capacity 1. Determine the maximum flow in this network using the Ford-Fulkerson method.
If all outgoing edges of the source are saturated, then we can construct such a matrix, and moreover, the
elementsX i,jof the matrix are equal to the flows alonge i,j. If any outgoing edge from the source is not
saturated, such a matrix does not exist.
1

---PAGE_BREAK---

To see why this method works, consider the flows into and out of thea ivertices for integer-valued flows
(such as the ones generated by the Ford-Fulkerson method when executing on a flow network with integer
capacities). We notice that a row hasr i1s if, and only if, the vertexa ihas a total outflow ofr i(because
each edge out ofa icorresponds to one of the values in columni, and all the edges froma ihave capacity
1), but this is only possible if the flow from the source toa iis exactlyr ibecause the only edge that flows
intoa iis from the source. These edges have capacityr i, so they all need to be saturated.
After you have studied circulation with demands in the lecture recordings about network flow, please
note that they can be used to model this problem in much simpler terms as there is no need to include
additional source and sink nodes (and their outgoing/incoming edges): you simply put the nodesa iwith
demand−r i, the nodesb jwith demandc jand solve the circulation with demands to check if there is a
feasible solution. The additional nodes, edges and checks in the solution in the previous paragraphs
are just implicitly doing the reduction of the circulation with demands problem to the maximum flow
problem.
Problem 4.Consider the problem of allocating a set of jobs to one of two supercomputers. Each job must be
allocated to exactly one of the two computers. The two computers are configured slightly differently, so for each
job, you know how much it will cost on each of the computers. There is an additional constraint. Some of the
jobs are related, and it would be preferable, but not required, to run them on the same computer. For each pair
of related jobs, you know how much more it will cost if they are run on separate computers. Give an efficient
algorithm for determining the optimal way to allocate the jobs to the computers, where your goal is to minimise
the total cost.
Solution
Create a graph with two edges between related jobs, one in each direction, whose capacities are the cost
to run those jobs on separate computers. Add edges fromsto all jobs with a capacity equal to thecost
to run on computer 1, and edges from all jobs totwith capacity equal to thecost to run on computer 2.
The minimum cut will be the best total cost since you are paying to either put the job on computer 1 or
2, and paying for related jobs that are cut from each other when assigned to different computers. But be
careful: when considering the minimum cut, all the jobs that end up in theSside of the cut are executed
oncomputer 2, while all the jobs that end up in theTside of the cut are executed oncomputer 1.
Problem 5.Consider a variant of network flows in which vertices also have capacities. That is for each vertex
exceptsandt, there is a maximum amount of flow that can enter and leave it. Describe a simple transformation
that can be made to this problem so that its maximum flow can be solved using an ordinary maximum flow
algorithm1.
Solution
For each non-source non-sink vertexv, do the following: Create two new verticesv inandv out. Take all
the incoming edges tovand replacevwithv in. Take all the outgoing edges fromvand replacevwith
vout. Create an edge fromv intov outwith capacity equal to the capacity ofv. Deletevfrom the network.
Now we can solve for the maximum flow in this graph, and the solution will be the maximum flow in the
original graph as well.
Problem 6.Two paths in a graph areedge disjointif they have no edges in common. Given a directed graph, we
would like to determine the maximum number of edge-disjoint paths from vertexsto vertext.
(a) Describe how to determine the maximum number of edge-disjoints−tpaths.
(b) What is the time complexity of this approach?
1Do not try to modify the Ford-Fulkerson algorithm. In general, it is always safer when solving a problem to reduce the problem to another
known problem by transforming the input, rather than modifying the algorithm for the related problem.
2

---PAGE_BREAK---

(c) How could we modify this approach to findvertex-disjoint paths(i.e. paths with no vertices in common)?
Solution
(a) Given a directed graphG, create a flow networkG′fromGas follows: Letsbe the source, andtbe
the sink. Give every edge a capacity of 1. Now we can run the maximum flow algorithm, and the
resulting flow is the number ofedge-disjointpaths.
This works because the number ofedge-disjointpaths that pass through a vertexvis at most
min(indegree(v), outdegree(v)). The maximum flow through a vertexvis the same value, because
all edges are capacity 1.
(b) The time complexity of Ford-Fulkerson is bounded byO(E f)whereEis the number of edges and
fis the maximum flow. Here, the maximum flow is upper-bounded by the outdegree ofs, so the
complexity isO(E×outdegree(s))which is bounded byO(E V).
(c) Create the flow network as specified in part a), but add capacities of 1 for each vertex, and then
perform the transform described in the solution to problem 5. This ensures that the flow through
each vertex is at most 1, whereas before the flow through a vertex was equal to the number of paths
through it.
Supplementary Problems
Problem 7.You are a radio station host and are in charge of scheduling the songs for today’s program. Every
song can be classified as being from a particular era, and a particular genre. Your boss has given you a strict set
of requirements that the songs must conform to. No song can be played more than once during the program.
Among the songs chosen, for each of theneras 1≤i≤n, you must play exactlye isongs of that era, and for each
of themgenres 1≤j≤m, you must play exactlyg jsongs from that genre. Of course,P
iei=P
jgj. Devise
an algorithm that given a list of all of the songs you could choose from, their era and their genre, determines a
subset of them that satisfies the requirements, or determines that it is not possible.
Solution
Make a bipartite graph with verticesa 1, . . . ,a ncorresponding to eras, and verticesb 1, . . . ,b mcorrespond-
ing to genres. For each combination of eraiand genrej, add an edge froma itob jwith a capacity equal
to the number of distinct songs that belong to that combination of era and genre (think about how this
would change if a certain amount of repetitions of each song were possible). Add a source with outgoing
edges to each genre vertexa iwith capacitye i(where 1≤i≤n). Add a sink vertex, with an edge from each
vertexb jto the sink with capacityg j(where 1≤j≤m). Run the Ford-Fulkerson method on this graph,
and if a maximum flow has valueP
iei=P
jgj, then it is possible to play songs in the required combi-
nation. Otherwise it is not. The flow along the edges froma itob jwill tell you how many songs from
a particular combination of era and genre should be played (which you can then easily select without
repetition by looking at your input list).
Problem 8.Implement the Ford-Fulkerson method using:
• DFS for finding augmenting paths.
• BFS for finding augmenting paths.
3