Week 6 Applied Sheet
Objectives:The applied sessions, in general, give practice in problem solving, in analysis of algorithms and data
structures, and in mathematics and logic useful in the above.
Instructions to the class:Work with your peers, and actively participate in the class.
Instructions to TAs:The purpose of the applied class is not to solve the practical exercises! The purpose is to
guide students, discuss particular sticking points, and not simply make answers available.
Supplementary problems:The supplementary problems provide additional practice for you to complete after
your applied class. Problems that are marked as(Advanced)difficulty are beyond the difficulty that you would
be expected to complete in this unit, but are nonetheless useful practice problems as they will teach you skills
and concepts that you can apply to other problems.
Problems
Problem 1.Consider a buggy implementation of Dijkstra’s algorithm in which the distance estimate to a vertex
is only updated the first time the vertex is discovered, and not in any subsequent relaxations. Give a graph on
which this bug will cause the algorithm to not produce the correct answer.
Problem 2.Can Prim’s and Kruskal’s algorithms be applied on a graph with negative weights to compute a
minimum spanning tree? Why or why not?
Problem 3.Consider the problem of planning a cross-country road trip. You have a map of Australia consisting
of the locations of towns, each of which has a petrol station, with the corresponding petrol prices (which may be
different at each town). You are currently at a particular townsand would like to travel to townt. Your car has a
fuel capacity ofClitres, and for each road on the map, you know the amount of petrol it will take to travel along
it. Your tank can only contain non-negative integer amounts of petrol, and all roads cost an integer amount of
petrol to travel along. You cannot travel along a road if you do not have enough petrol to make it all the way.
You may refuel at any petrol station whether your tank is empty or not (but only to integer values), and you are
not required to fill your tank. Assuming that your tank is initially empty, describe an algorithm for determining
the cheapest way to travel to cityt.[Hint: You should model the problem as a shortest path problem and use
Dijkstra’s algorithm.]
Problem 4.Consider a variant of the shortest path problem where instead of finding paths that minimise the
total weight of all edges, we instead wish to minimise the weight of the largest edge appearing on the path. Let’s
refer to such a path as abottleneck path.
(a) Give an example of a graph in which a shortest path between some pair of vertices is not a bottleneck (and
where the graph also contain a bottleneck path which is not a shortest path).
(b) Prove that all of the paths in a minimum spanning treeMof a graphGare bottleneck paths inG.
(c) Prove that not all bottleneck paths ofGare paths in a minimum spanning treeMofG.
Problem 5.Consider the following algorithm quite similar to Kruskal’s algorithm for producing a minimum
spanning tree of a connected graph:
1:functionMINIMUM_SPANNING_TREE(G=(V , E))
2:sort(E,descending, key((u,v))=w(u,v))//Sort edges in order from heaviest to lightest
3:T=E
4:for eachedgeein nonincreasing orderdo
5:ifT -{e}is connectedthen
6:T=T -{e}
1

---PAGE_BREAK---

7:returnT
Instead of adding edges in order of weight (lightest first) and keeping the graph acyclic, we remove edges in order
of weight (heaviest first) while keeping the graph from becoming disconnected.
(a) Identify a useful invariant maintained by this algorithm.
(b) Prove that this invariant is maintained by the algorithm.
(c) Deduce that this algorithm correctly produces a minimum spanning tree.
Problem 6.Recall from the lecture recordings that breadth-first search can be used to find single-source short-
est paths on unweighted graphs, or equivalently, graphs where all edges have weight one. Consider the similar
problem where instead of only having weight one, edges are now allowed to have weight zero or one. We call this
thezero-oneshortest path problem. Write pseudocode for an algorithm for solving this problem. Your solution
should run inO(V+E)time (this means that you cannot use Dijkstra’s algorithm!)[Hint: Combine ideas from
breadth-first search and Dijkstra’s algorithm]
Problem 7.You are the manager of a super computer and receive a set of requests for allocating time frames
in that computer. Thei-th request specifies the starting times iand the finishing timef i. A subset of requests
is compatible if there is no time overlap between any requests in that subset. Develop an algorithm to choose a
compatible subset of maximal size (i.e., you want to accept as many requests as feasible, but you cannot select
incompatible requests).[Hint: Develop a greedy algorithm.]
Supplementary Problems
Problem 8.For the union-find data structure, there are multiple heuristics to handle how we union two disjoint-
set trees. One such heuristic is "union-by-size", where the disjoint-set with less elements is appended to the dis-
joint set with more elements. We want to prove that the worst-case cost of all the union operations isO(Vlog(V))
for a disjoint set ofVelements, when using this heuristic.
(a) First prove the following lemma: For any disjoint-set tree constructed via "union-by-size" heuristic, size(r)≥
2height(r), whererrepresents the root node of some disjoint-set tree, size(r)represents the number of nodes
in the disjoint set tree, and height(r)represents the height of the tree.
(b) Using the lemma from part (a), prove that a union takesO(log(V)).
(c) Hence, prove that all the unions takeO(Vlog(V)).
Problem 9.Suppose that we wish to solve the single-source shortest path problem for graphs with non-negative
bounded integer edge weights, i.e. there is a constantcsuch that for all edges(u,v)it holds that 0≤w(u,v)≤c.
Explain how we can modify Dijkstra’s algorithm to run inO(V+E)time in this case.[Hint: Improve the priority
queue]
Problem 10.Consider the following supposed invariant for Kruskal’s algorithm: At each iteration, each con-
nected component in the current spanning forest is a minimum spanning tree of the vertices in that component.
(a) Prove or disprove whether Kruskal’s algorithm maintains this invariant.
(b) Can this invariant be used to prove that Kruskal’s algorithm is correct?
Problem 11.Consider the following state of a union-find data structure:
2

---PAGE_BREAK---

01 2
3 4 5 6 7
89
(a) Perform the followingunion()calls sequentially using theunion-by-rankandpath compressionheuris-
tics, visualising the outcome.
(i)union(4, 0)
(ii)union(8, 3)
(iii)union(9, 0)
(b) Compare the difference between the final state of the forest and the state of the forest if you were to use
theunion-by-sizeheuristic alone.
3